a degraded view of humanity uh i feel
where we are effectively like
marionettes um and that we we're just
being played and that we don't have any
agency anymore and therefore uh we can't
be responsible for our own words not not
just our actions we can't be responsible
for our own words and their and the
ramifications so we have to be
controlled and we have to be stifled by
the state and it's very it makes me very
nervous
so i've been thinking through
um the importance of free speech i
suppose from a psychological perspective
and
it seems to me that
well we can walk through some axioms and
you can tell me what you think about
them if you would
so
i mean the first thing we might posit is
that
it's useful to think it's better to
think than not to think and that might
seem self-evident but
but thought can be troublesome and stir
up trouble and your thoughts can be
inaccurate so
it's perhaps not that
unreasonable to
start the questioning there but
i think it was alfred north whitehead
who said that
thinking allows
our thoughts to die
instead of us
and so
he was thinking about the evolution of
thought in some sense from a biological
perspective so imagine a creature that's
incapable of thought
has to act something out
a representation of the world or an
intent it has to be embodied
and then if that fails
well it fails in action and so the
consequence of that might be death it
might be very severe
whereas
once you can think
you can represent the world abstractly
you can divorce the abstraction from the
world and then you can produce
avatars of yourself
sometimes in image like in dreams let's
say or in literature and fiction and
movies and so on produce avatars of
ourselves that are fictional
and then run
them as simulations in the abstract
world and observe the consequences
and
we do that in our stories we do that
when we dream we do that when we imagine
in images and depict a dramatic scenario
playing itself out but then we also do
that in words because
we encode those images it's one more
level of abstraction we encode those
images into words and those words become
partial dramatic avatars and then the
words can battle with one another so
thought seems to work let's say verbal
thought
you ask yourself a question
you receive an answer in some mysterious
manner there's an internal revelation of
sorts that's the spontaneous thought you
know when you sit down to write a book
thoughts come to you perhaps because you
pose yourself a question and no one
knows how that works but we experience
it that thoughts manifest themselves in
the theater of our imagination
so that's the revelatory aspect and then
there's the critical aspect which is
well now you've thought this and perhaps
you've written it down
can you generate counter positions
are there universes that you can imagine
where this doesn't apply are there
situations where it doesn't apply are
there better ways of formulating that
thought and but i would say
with regard to critical thought and to
some degree with regard to productive
thought
an
indeterminate
proportion of that is dependent on
speech
i i don't think it's unreasonable to
point out that thought is internalized
speech
and that the dialectical process that
constitutes critical thinking is
internalized speech so you and i are
engaging in a dialectic enterprise
you'll pause it something and i'll
respond to it and you'll respond to that
and
we're we're
we're in a kind of combat there's some
cooperation about it as well
and we're attempting to formulate a
truth more clearly at least in principle
if we're being honest
we do that when we're speaking so our
thought the quality of our thought is
actually dependent on our ability to
speak our minds absolutely and then
sure go ahead well i i couldn't agree
more because i think
speech is the way in which we
collaborate on our thoughts you know
that that's how it how it works you you
refine those thought processes that
you've described i mean i'm no i'm no
psychologist but i understand this basic
premise that that
we have these various thoughts that are
continually in conflict within ourselves
unless we're able to articulate them and
to engage in others through that process
through that transactional process of
speech
then those thoughts are never refined
and they remain in this kind of infancy
and this is yes
they're as refined as we can make them
as individuals but that's also assuming
that you even have the words which you
also learned in a dialectical process
right exactly it's not as though the
truth is ever uh fully graspable but we
can we can get nearer to it through that
collaborative process of speaking and
articulating the thoughts and in fact
even in the act of like you say writing
or articulating yourself uh
as with your self-authoring program for
instance the act of writing things out
is what clarifies the points of view for
you i've actually found that the the the
the way that i think about these issues
now is largely a product of of the fact
that i've written so much about it and
changed my mind through the act of
learning how to express myself on these
points and and and the and the
consequence of not having that
opportunity
i think is uh
something i would barely want to
contemplate and i think that to give an
example of of uh
of the moment which is that because any
kind of attempt to have a discussion or
debate about the perceived conflict
between trans rights and gender critical
feminism because to even attempt that
discussion at the moment will have such
uh grave social consequences and
certainly in terms of career prospects
major consequences people will not have
that discussion i have people i know in
politics in the media and they say to me
quite honestly i will not talk about
this i have concerns i have qualms i
want answers to questions but i
absolutely will not open my mouth about
this and if you don't do that uh this is
why no one understands the issue this is
why no one has reached any kind of
consensus on this issue all we have is a
sense in which to have the quote unquote
wrong opinion makes you a pariah
and therefore i'd better not have that
opinion well then that's not a sincerely
held conviction that's just that's just
if the definition of wrong is
continually transforming and in an
unpredictable manner then it's best just
to sidestep the issue entirely and then
that leaves it murky and ill-defined and
assuming that you believe that thought
has any utility and so when you're
sitting down to write when i'm sitting
down to write
and i produce a sentence you know it
might have come from some theoretical
perspective maybe i'm approaching
something from a freudian perspective or
a marxist perspective or a uh or a an
enlightenment perspective etc i mean
it's it's a
it's a it's a psychological trope i
suppose that
we all think the thoughts of dead
philosophers right we think we have our
own opinions but that's really very very
very very rarely the case it's not that
easy to come up with something truly
original and generally make incremental
progress at best and so your ability to
abstractly represent the world and then
to generate
avatars that can be defeated without you
dying is dependent on your incorporation
of a multitude of opinions and that in
itself is a consequence of
i mean that works to the degree that
communication is actually free and that
you can get access to as much thought as
you can possibly manage so i can't see
how you can deny the centrality
of free speech as a fundamental right or
the fundamental right perhaps
unless you simultaneously deny the
utility of thought but maybe if you are
also inclined to
remove the individual
from the central position of the
political discourse then maybe you can
also
make the case at least implicitly that
individual thought doesn't matter and
that mostly it's just causing trouble
but i think individual thought is key
and actually even in the the the outline
you've described there there isn't there
is individual agency in reaching a
conclusion that has been articulated
before insofar as if you are engaged
with a multitude of writers and
philosophers and artists and ideas and
you've come out with a perspective well
that perspective may not be original to
you but the process that you've gone
through to reach that viewpoint is
individual to you you know there is a
power in that's there's something
important about that you know there's
something crucial it's if you're a
practicing psychotherapist
one of the things you have to learn
is to not provide people with your words
too much
what you want is for them to formulate
the
conclusion
and you can guide them through the
process of investigation you talked
about the self-authoring process and
which is online at selfauthoring.com
that
it steps people say through the process
of writing an autobiography of analyzing
their current virtues and faults and of
making a future plan the utility of all
of that is dependent on
the the person who's
um undertaking the exercise
generating their own
verbal representations right
and that seems to cement it somehow as
yours if you've come up with the words
and so it's that it's the uppermost
expression of personhood the ability to
have the words that you should speak
reveal themselves to you and to have the
right to express them as you see fit
yes in which case if you if you are
merely repeating an accepted script then
then to what extent can you say to can
you even say to be an individual at all
you know
this this to me well i think that's part
of the philosophical conundrum is that
if you believe that all people do is
repeat pre-digested scripts especially
if
your view is that the fundamental human
motivation is power and the entire
social landscape is nothing but a
competition between
equally
what would you say selfish and
single-minded
powers drivers
then there is no
individual
there's no individual in that conceptual
world
and it seems to me that that's the world
that
we're being pushed to
inhabit and are criticized for on moral
grounds for criticizing